Dear Professor Saramäki,

I saw your were looking for a postdoc to work with you at Aalto University and it sounds really interesting to me. As you suggest in your blog post I don't send my CV nor cover letter but will try to 'briefly' summarized that in this mail. I hope to submit the thesis around April 2019, it may be to late for you in that case you can just skip the rest of the mail... 

I am just finishing my PhD in Barcelona, where I develop computer model to explore social (and historical) questions as part of the European project EPNET (http://www.roman-ep.net/). I have a broad transdisciplinary background, with at its center evolutionary biology and computer science (my undergrad), with some addition from cognitive science (sociology, psychology,.. from my first master) and History and Philosophy of Science (from a second master) on the sides. To summarise what I do, I would say  "I develop Agent Based Evolutionary Model to study a wide variety of system". To illustrate the "wide" part of the sentence, I could say that I worked with Biologists, Psychologists and now with Archaeologists and Historians, on topics such as human cooperation, division of labor in robots, lichens, amphora trade in Roman Empire, twitter interaction,... The main interest that bring all that under a coherent umbrella could be seen as trying to understand how systems made up of separate entities (homogeneous or not), decentralized and mostly unsupervised, can evolve various unexpected (often) adaptive properties (such as division of labor, cooperation, specialization,...). To answer this general question I use computer model that I test against data in various different situation.

To test against those various dataset I recently started to use Bayesian Inference. I always felt as important to have a way to validate my models with the available evidences. Bayesian Inference appeared as a great way to do so. During the last two years I included this to my work. It's often costly computationally as I cannot calculate the likelihood of my models and I rely on Approximate Bayesian Computation and Simulation to get the posteriors distributions. Hopefully I work in a Supercomputing Center and I can parallelize and split between hundred of CPU those heavy computations.

During the past months I also started to work on online social media data with Alex Bentley, from University of Tennessee Knoxville. Following a paper by Vosoughi et al., published in Science earlier this year, we develop models to reproduce the number of retweet of true and false information that the original authors observed. We have pretty good results and I hope this work will be published soon.

To say a few words on the network part of my work: I don't think I am a classic network/complex system scientist --though one of my co-supervisor (Sergi Valverde from Universitat Pompeu Fabra where I am doing my PhD) is one of them and I am working with a team of "network science specialist" (Albert Diaz team at Unviersitat de Barcelona): I have no background in physics and I have not a really strong math/formal background. Nonetheless I already worked with networks: I published a paper where we evolved simulated robots interacting on simple networks and I though and build the main model I use for my PhD to be tested with different network of social interaction (we tried some simple one but didn't have time to develop this part yet).... Nonetheless, in each case the network part remain really basic (comparing different simple topologies and different basic metrics), it gave me some experience handling (read/write/generate/analysis) networks in different programming language (R/python/C++).

I have a lot of idea of future work I would like to continue, but I feel like I wrote a lot already so I will try to be quick.

The main thing I want to follow in a close future is the analyse of spread of news in online social media. We have simple models able to reproduce the distribution of true and false retweet at an aggregated level, incorporating network (the real one or some model) is the next step. As public agency start to be aware that understanding those phenomena is important, more attention will be brought to that and more dataset will became available (twitter just released 1TB  of data for scientist to work on Russian and Iran network that may have an impact on US election https://blog.twitter.com/official/en_us/topics/company/2018/enabling-further-research-of-information-operations-on-twitter.html). I think that network science and modeling have an important role to play here.

On another hand I would like to keep working with historical data. They are the only alternative to compare with actual analysis. At the same time, quantitative works on those dataset are just starting. As an example, I digitalized and started to analyse archive on commercial boats entering and going out of the port of Trieste, from 1850 to 1910. This dataset gives us a general view on which country was sending which kind of good and where, when the world was starting to industrialized and get more and more globalized. It's a perfect dataset to test assumption  on how social, political and economic interactions can shape societies. There are plenty of similar dataset that still remain to be looked at (people from late XVIIth early XXth were crazy registering everything they could) and on which rarely any quantitative and formal analysis have been done yet.

Thank you for taking the time to read this, I hope my profile will somehow catch your interest. Don't hesitate to ask me anything unclear or further detail on some of my project. Sorry for the length of the mail, I wanted to be brief, it looks like I failed.

All the best,

Simon

