Agent Based Modeling and Bayes Inference to learn about the past: the need for High Performance Computing.

Abstract:

Historians and Archaeologists are building hypotheses about past Human Activity based on the archaeological data and the remaining historical sources they have. But to formally express, test and validate those hypothesis is not straightforward:
 1/ There is no common set of theories nor a unique epistemologic framework under which these hypothesis are built and can be compared. Often the theories used to express those hypotheses are borrowed from various fields, ranging from ecology to economy or psychology, sometimes there is no explicit theory used at all, and most of the time hypotheses are only verbally formulated.
 2/ The available datasets are biased, noisy and sparse, and reliable historical sources are rare and also heavily biased.

In order to solve the first point more and more people in History and Archaeology are turning themselves to Agent Based Modeling (ABM). ABM allows represent formally any kind of hypothesis in an almost natural way of translating verbal description to formal model. The descriptive nature of those model and the various levels of details at which systems can be described makes relatively easy the incorporation of theories and knowledge coming from many heterogeneous fields. But given this heterogeneity and this high level of details, the complexity of ABM can increase drastically, moreover when real-world ranges of parameters have to be used. This leads to simulation more and more demanding computationally that requires High Performance Computing if to be simulated in a reasonable amount of time.

Solving the second problem is hard: the system at sake is not available to empirical experiment anymore and it's very unlikely to find new archaeological and historical evidences. The actual known evidences are the ones that have to be used. Within this scenario, a good solution to test, validate and compare the hypotheses is to rely on Bayesian inference. Within the Bayesian framework, it becomes possible to associate a probability with a hypothesis being true given available evidences. And those probabilities can be updated if new evidence appears or if other hypotheses brings new elements to explain the system studied. Sadly it is often impossible to easily calculate those probabilities, moreover when mechanisms are unknown and hardly quantifiable. To overcome this, a new method called Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC) has been developed. But, as it's main component is heavy simulation of the expected outcome of the hypothesis, it is often not useful without the use of High Performance Computing.

Thus, if both elements look promising for the study of History and Archaeology, they have limited practical scope if used within a traditional computational framework. We illustrate this by an example where ABM and ABC are used to test hypothesis about the Economy of the Roman Empire between 200BC and 200AC. The model used economics and evolutionary processes to understand data of ceramics distribution in the Roman East from 200BC to 200AC.  

